What Do?
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The easiest stage in the world if you don’t count the last two hours.
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What Was It Like?

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 You know in school when you have a big project due that you’re supposed to work on all semester but only begin at 4 p.m. the night before? 
 
Yeah. Like that. 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Overheard
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Cole, I’m at 96-watt average right now. Where you at?”
“94.”
“DAMMIT!”
~When the incentives are right, bike racing is really weird.
 
“Matti, what’s your favorite fruit?”
~Cole, to me, in the peloton. Like I said, when the incentives are right, bike racing is really weird.
 
“Alex, how was it?”
“That was the worst. No one in the breakaway spoke English. I may as well have been alone for 85 miles.”
~Alex made the breakaway for the day and spent 85 miles out the front with three other monsters who didn’t (or didn’t want to) speak English.
 
“Dub dub dub dub.”
~Me, on the final Mogollon climb, mimicking diesel engine noises as I passed a few fellow Rio riders. Diesel Daddy had a day (and probably my only day this year, lol). 
 
“That team car whipped out into the passing lane and made a motorcycle ride into the gravel shoulder to avoid a head-on.”
~The race may have been over, but a team that shall remain nameless almost made the front page of the Silver City Daily Press for all the wrong reasons. 😬
 
“How was yesterday’s d***ing the dog to warp speed finish?”
“Fastest last half for that stage ever, and it was guttered AF“
“Guttered AF?
“Two wide peloton string out on the white line 1/4 mile long in the drops doing 400 😂”
“Fuuuuuuuuuuuuggg.”
~The second half of the race leading to the Mogollon was a nightmare.
 
“Thanks for making dinner for us Matti – what’s for dessert?”
“Oh dang – actually – please hold.”
(Reaches into the freezer and pulls out a thick package)”
“What’s that?”
“The people at Walmart call these Fatboys—the most ice cream it’s physically possible to stuff between two chocolate wafers. Thanks for reminding me.”
~If you want to make cyclists happy in the middle of a stage race, look no further than ice cream.
 
“What’s going on, Henry? You look stressed.”
“I’m in this girl’s DMs and look at what I said.”
(I look). 
“Dear God, Henry.”
“I know. But she responded to that!”
“If that’s not true love I don’t know what is.”
~Henry’s side quests are going well. 
 
“Is today the TT?”
“No. It’s the first day. That’s the third day.”
“K! Love you. Only text me if you win.”
~I ❤️ my wife.
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shoot Me (What I Hated About Today)

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 After today’s race, I’ve decided I’d rather race sorta hard all race rather than coast for two hours and then bleed out my backside for the remaining two. 
I really, really, really need to invest in some fast twitch fibers. I don’t think I spent more time at or near my max sprint (500 watts) since…Gila 2023.
At home, I buy blocks of cheese and slice it with a Norwegian ‘ostehovel‘ I bought there. It’s fast, it cuts the cheese super thin and it makes me feel like I’m in a fjord, not wherever I am now, which is, by default, worse. Well, I forgot it, so now I have to cut uneven, fat chunks off the cheese blocks that don’t melt like I want them to and make a mess. Yeah.
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hold Me (What I Loved About Today?)

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 For my Rio Grande team clothing order this year, instead of getting road racing bibs, I got gravel racing cargo bibs – Sweet Jesus, they’re amazing. I have two large pouches on either side of my legs and could probably fit a six-pack of Miller Lite in each. Kangaroos really have it figured out.
Not dying a thousand deaths on the Mogollon. 
Having two thiccccc cholula drenched egg sandwiches waiting for me at the end of the stage. Thanks past Matti!
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Snaps