What Do?
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A road race with the stage profile of shark teeth.
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What Was It Like?

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The emotional journey of a passenger on the Titanic – not one who got a lifeboat.
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Overheard
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Matti, you have 24 seconds to sign in.”
~Alex Marr to me, as I rolled in REALLY close to the stage sign-in.
 
“You f***ing c***s!”
~Me, to two Novo Nordisk riders and Stephen Schaefer when, inexplicably, they grabbed fistfuls of brakes going through some swoopy rollers and opened up a forty-foot gap at 30 mph to the peloton right before the turn to the cliff dwellings. Dropped again while feeling good for the dumbest reasons.
 
“You sonofabitch!”
~Landis Cyclery rider to me as I attacked the gruppetto gruppetto climbing out of the cliff dwellings.
 
“Redbull or coke?”
“Both.”
~Me, to Tony in the team car. 250 mg of caffeine sure is a ride.
 
“Did everyone make it? Is everyone alive?”
~Robert, the 76-year-old kind owner of the host house, after we crossed the finish line.
 
Sorta Robert, Sorta.
 
“You got a sticky bottle? So that’s how you almost caught me. Lol, I still beat you by 13 seconds in the overall Diesel Daddy.”
~Henry didn’t know how close he was to getting stabbed.
 
“Too blessed to be stressed.”
~A sign in Silver City
 
“How did it go?”
“After I stop feeling suicidal ideation about my performance, maybe we can talk about it.”
“Oh, so it went well.”
~Me, to Howdyshell over text. Self-loathing is a hell of a drug.
 
“Danger – High Hopes.”
~A poster in Silver City that grimly summarizes my life.
 
“More chips, please.”
~Team Rio at La Cocina post-race. Collectively, we had six baskets of chips and salsa before our main meal arrived.
 
“Are you going to eat that?”
~Ethan and I, hungrily watching Tony attempt to eat his one-pound burger like junkyard dogs.
 
“Of course, someone forgot something. Some people’s kids.”
~Tony to me, after we discovered a certain rider forgot their toiletry kit at my in-law’s house in Albuquerque.
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shoot Me (What I Hated About Today)

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shitty positioning (again) completely negating diamond legs.
Leaving the boyz ❤️.
Leaving Silver City.
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hold Me (What I Loved About Today?)

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I finished perfectly ‘Mid’ in the overall – 50th – lol.
Emory’s pass was open, and I got to drive over it into the sunset.
Tony and I should start an Airbnb cleaning business – we packed and deep-cleaned Casa Cooper in 57 minutes.
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Snaps